Milestone 1: Setup the Simulated Server Lab (Time: 2 Hours)

Your first priority is creating the 6 "servers" that Ansible will manage. Do not install Redis on your local machine; the containers will handle that later via automation.  

    Create the infra/ folder as specified in the submission requirements.  

    Write a Dockerfile (or Containerfile):  

        Use ubuntu:22.04 as the base image.  

        Install openssh-server, sudo, and python3 (Ansible requires Python on target nodes).

        Configure SSH to allow public-key authentication and start the SSH service.  

    Write the compose.yml file:  

        Define 6 services named redis-node-1 through redis-node-6.  

        Assign them fixed IP addresses (from 10.10.0.11 to 10.10.0.16) on a static subnet.  

        Mount your local public SSH key (~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub) into the containers' authorized_keys file so you can log in without passwords.  

    Test Step: Run podman-compose up -d (or docker compose up -d). Verify you can run ssh root@10.10.0.11 from your terminal without being prompted for a password.  

Milestone 2: Build the CLI Entrypoint & Prerequisite Checks (Time: 2 Hours)

The project sheet states your tool must handle dependency checking before doing anything else. Python is highly recommended for writing redis-tool because its subprocess and argparse modules make CLI wrapper development clean and readable.  

    Create the redis-tool file and make it executable (chmod +x redis-tool).  

    Implement the Prerequisite Check Logic:  

        Use Python's shutil.which() or execute command -v to look for podman or docker. If both exist, prioritize Podman.  

        Check for ansible-playbook and verify its version is 2.14+ by parsing the output of ansible-playbook --version.  

        If everything passes, print the versions and continue ; if something is missing, print clear installation commands and exit with code 1.  

Milestone 3: Write the Ansible Inventory & Phase 1 Provisioning (Time: 5 Hours)

Now, you will write the automation scripts that turn those blank Ubuntu containers into a unified Redis Cluster.  

    Create an Ansible inventory file (ansible/inventory/hosts.ini):  

        Group your 6 IPs under a header like [redis_nodes].  

        Tell Ansible to use the root user and specify the private key location.

    Create the Redis Ansible Role (ansible/roles/redis/tasks/main.yml):  

        Remember the rules: Do not use pre-built Ansible Galaxy roles. Use built-in modules like apt, shell, or template.  

        Task 1: Install Redis dependencies (gcc, make, etc.) or install redis-server directly via apt. Tip: Installing via standard packages or building a target version from source are both allowed—choose apt for maximum speed if the correct version is available, or use a quick curl and make compile for the exact target version.  

        Task 2: Use the template module to push a custom redis.conf file containing:  
        Plaintext

        port 6379
        cluster-enabled yes
        cluster-config-file nodes.conf
        cluster-node-timeout 5000
        bind 0.0.0.0

        Task 3: Start/restart the Redis service.  

    Orchestrate the Cluster Formation via the CLI:  

        When a user runs ./redis-tool provision version 7.0.15 ..., your script should trigger your setup playbook.  

        After Redis is running on all nodes, execute a final local task using redis-cli --cluster create 10.10.0.11:6379 10.10.0.12:6379 ... --cluster-replicas 1 --cluster-yes to automatically bind 3 masters and 3 replicas.  

Milestone 4: Cluster Status & Data Verification (Time: 4 Hours)

To prove your rolling upgrade works flawlessly later on, you need a way to check status and safely read/write data.  

    Phase 3 (./redis-tool status) : Have your Python script execute redis-cli -h 10.10.0.11 cluster nodes or cluster info via a shell command. Parse that text output to build the neat console table requested in the assignment (showing IPs, roles, slot ranges, and active keys).  

    Phase 2 (./redis-tool data seed-keys 1000) : Write a short loop in your CLI program that uses a deterministic algorithm. For example, generate keys like key_1, key_2, and compute their values using an SHA256 hash of the key name. Write these pairs directly into the cluster using a Redis Python library or local redis-cli commands.  

    Phase 2 (./redis-tool data verify) : Read those 1000 keys back out. Recompute the SHA256 values on the fly, compare them with what you fetched, and print a clear PASS or FAIL baseline.  

Milestone 5: The Rolling Upgrade Logic (Time: 5 Hours)

This is the core challenge of your project. Your script must loop through the nodes systematically to guarantee zero down-time.  

Follow this precise programmatic order in your script:  

    Pre-flight: Run your validation functions to confirm the current cluster status is completely ok. Run data verify to ensure your data baseline is healthy.  

    Upgrade Replicas First: Loop through the three replica nodes one by one. Stop Redis on the node, install version 7.2.6, and turn it back on. Wait for cluster nodes to report that the replica has successfully caught up (sync complete) before moving to the next replica node.  

    Upgrade Masters (With Manual Failover): Loop through your master nodes. Before touching a master, connect to its designated replica node and run CLUSTER FAILOVER. This cleanly promotes the upgraded replica to become the new master, turning the old master into a replica with zero downtime. Now, safely upgrade that old master (which is currently acting as a replica).  

    Post-Flight: Run your data verify suite one last time to prove that all 1000 key-value pairs survived the upgrade completely intact.